---
pub_title: "Effect of SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Pregnancy on Maternal and Neonatal Outcomes in Africa: An AFREhealth Call for Evidence through Multicountry Research Collaboration"
authors: "Nachega et al."
journal: "American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene"
year: "2020"
link: https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.20-1553 
image: /images/publications/33372651.jpg
---
Effect of SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Pregnancy on Maternal and Neonatal Outcomes in Africa: An AFREhealth Call for Evidence through Multicountry Research Collaboration
Nachega JB, Sam-Agudu NA, Budhram S, Taha TE, Vannevel V, Somapillay P, Ishoso DK, Tshiasuma Pipo M, Bongo-Pasi Nswe C, Ditekemena J, Ayele BT, Machekano RN, Gachuno OW, Kinuthia J, Mwongeli N, Sekikubo M, Musoke P, Agbeno EK, Umar LW, Ntakwinja M, Mukwege DM, Smith ER, Mills EJ, Otshudiema JO, Mbala-Kingebeni P, Kayembe JN, Mavungu Landu DJ, Muyembe Tamfum JJ, Zumla A, Langenegger EJ, Mofenson LM, For The AFREhealth Covid-Research Collaboration Working Group

Abstract
In the African context, there is a paucity of data on SARS-CoV-2 infection and associated COVID-19 in pregnancy. Given the endemicity of infections such as malaria, HIV, and tuberculosis (TB) in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), it is important to evaluate coinfections with SARS-CoV-2 and their impact on maternal/infant outcomes. Robust research is critically needed to evaluate the effects of the added burden of COVID-19 in pregnancy, to help develop evidence-based policies toward improving maternal and infant outcomes. In this perspective, we briefly review current knowledge on the clinical features of COVID-19 in pregnancy; the risks of preterm birth and cesarean delivery secondary to comorbid severity; the effects of maternal SARS-CoV-2 infection on the fetus/neonate; and in utero mother-to-child SARS-CoV-2 transmission. We further highlight the need to conduct multicountry surveillance as well as retrospective and prospective cohort studies across SSA. This will enable assessments of SARS-CoV-2 burden among pregnant African women and improve the understanding of the spectrum of COVID-19 manifestations in this population, which may be living with or without HIV, TB, and/or other coinfections/comorbidities. In addition, multicountry studies will allow a better understanding of risk factors and outcomes to be compared across countries and subregions. Such an approach will encourage and strengthen much-needed intra-African, south-to-south multidisciplinary and interprofessional research collaborations. The African Forum for Research and Education in Health’s COVID-19 Research Working Group has embarked upon such a collaboration across Western, Central, Eastern and Southern Africa.
